The goal of this project is three-fold:

1. To understand the power model (i.e., how to calculate the signal
   noise ratios at each individual mobile user) in CDMA based 3G
   networks

2. To understand the feedback-based power management ideas for
   downlink power control, as well as other multicast support in
   cellular networks papers

3. To implement a simulation model for downlink power management for
   multicast traffic in CDMA based 3G networks.

For 1 --

Downlink means from the base station to the mobile user direction. As
described in class, for wireless communications, the signal-to noise
ratio (SNR) affects the bit error rate a mobile user experiences; for
proper data transmission, the power level used at the base station for
each mobile user should be adjusted such that each user can have
adequate, but not un-necessarily high, SNR for proper data reception,
and minimal interference to others. Saved power can also be used to
support more users. There are power models to calculate the SNR at
mobile stations in 3G cellular networks, parameters of the model in
includes distance between the base station and the mobile user, as
well as some others. Some are constants. You are asked to study the
related papers and books, and understand these models.

The power model can be read from the following papers: Xin Wang,
Ramachandran Ramjee, Harish Viswanathan, Adaptive and predictive
downlink resource management in next generation CDMA networks. Look
for the 14-page version of this paper.

For 2 --

Feedback-based power control is used in today's cellular networks,
mainly for unicast traffic. You are asked to read these power control
schemes, fully understand them. The papers are:

- for unicast 

  o Soumya Das, Sachin Ganu, Natalia Rivera, Ritabrata Roy,
    "Performance analysis of downlink power control in CDMA systems",
    IEEE Sarnoff Student Symposium 2004

- for multicast

  o M. Chuah, Teck Hu, and W. Luo, UMTS release 99/4 airlink
    enhancement for supporting MBMS services

  o George Xylomenos, Vasilis Tsakanikas, and George C. Polyzos,
    Reducing the transmission power requirements of the multimedia
    broadcast/multicast service

  o Antonios Alexiou, Christos Bouras, Vasileios Kokkinos, Evangelos
    Rekkas. Power efficient radio bearer selection in MBMS multicast
    mode

The following two papers are more general than above on multicast
support in cellular networks

  o Multicast scheduling in cellular data networks, IEEE Infocom 2007

  o Fixed/variable power multicast over heterogeneous fading channels
    in cellular networks, IEEE ICC 2008

For 3 -- The attached code is a cellular network simulator written in C/C++.

The code was developed by a previous graduate student of mine on
Linux. Just type "tar -xvf mobilityCC.tar", and "make". You should get
an executable called "cell", and you can run with just "./cell". The
execution takes about 6 to 7 minutes, which you certainly can try to
shorten. I think the link-list management is inefficient right now.

This simulation model does not have 1 and 2 above built in it. It does
have the model of a cell-based cellular network. And models for user
mobility, as well as user bandwidth requirements and cell bandwidth
management. It was developed for this paper:

Y. E. Liu and M. Han. A Cell-based Call Admission Control and
Bandwidth Reservation Scheme for QoS Support in Wireless Cellular
Networks. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Performance of Wireless
Networks and Communication Systems (WiNCS 2005), pages 273-282,
Philadelphia, PA. July 2005. The Society for Modeling and Simulation
International (SCS).
http://www.cs.umanitoba.ca/~yliu/MYPUB/wincs2005.pdf

You are asked to modify the code, or develop your own based on the
cellular network model implemented in this code, adding 1 and 3 in it,
and be able to model multicast power control schemes in such a
network. The ultimate goal of this research is to come up with sound
multicast power management schemes (preferably feedback-based) for
optimal performance. The simulator that you develop will be used for
studies toward this goal. You are encouraged to think of your own such
schemes. The challenge here is to determine what kind of information
should be sent back to the base station as feedbacks, and how a base
station uses these feedbacks for optimal power control. These
materials are for you to get started. I will let you know in case I
find more materials for this project. I am more than happy to talk
with you regarding any issues or aspects of this project, at any time.
For locating the papers, you can simply use google scholar, IEEE and
ACM digital libraries. If you find any more recent papers on this
research subject, by all means add them to your bibliography. It will
be part of the contribution of your project.
